Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you so much for being here.
I bet there are repeaters.
Um so, this is our third engagement here
at the 92nd Street Y. If you're a 2
years ago we started this with a night
on this nature of consciousness with
Antonio Damasio and David Chalmers. Last
year we had one on the nature of faith
with uh Rebecca Goldstein and Alan
Lightman. And tonight we have something
on immortality and or mortality because
obviously you can't think of one without
the other.
So, in order to do that I thought that
would be very interesting to have a
conversation on the different scales in
which we can think about the problem,
right? So, we can of course think about
it about it from a human scale. We are
all
animals that uh have this very
perplexing dilemma that we are
self-aware and that we know that our
life in this planet is of a limited
time.
And so, we have this combination, you
know, you can say like this uh
superposition of two tendencies which
tend to be quite different which on the
one hand we are animals, you know, we
have hair and nails that grow. We
reproduce like mammals most mammals do
and yet we can conceive of the infinite.
We can think about transcendence. We can
think about change and transformation
and we know who we are. At least we know
we are alive and we have an
understanding of what that means, right?
So, in 1973
um the cultural anthropologist Ernest
Becker wrote a book which won the Nobel
Prize uh the excuse me, the Pulitzer
Prize in uh 1974 called The Denial of
Death.
And in this book he explores precisely
this issue, right? How do we find
meaning
knowing that we have these two extremes
pulling us somewhat apart, you know, the
animal nature, the demigod kind of
nature, right? And it's a very
complicated conversation. And at about
the same time in the 1970s the first
models of climate change were being
developed.
And the realization that there was a
human impact on the weather was becoming
more and more obvious to those who were
studying this.
So, you can think of mortality or the
extension of life, immortality,
from a human scale to a planetary scale.
And tonight I am incredibly proud to
have two leading thinkers on these
topics.
Siddhartha Mukherjee and Elizabeth
Kolbert.
So, let me introduce them and they'll
join me here on stage. So, the way the
night goes is essentially like this. So,
each one of them will talk for about 15
or 20 minutes.
Then we will talk among amongst each
other, you know, I'll ask them
questions. They may have questions to
one another for another 15 or 20
minutes. Then we're going to open for
Q&A from you. Okay? And there is a
procedure for that. I think uh you have
cards or something like that that you
write on. I don't know exactly the
details.
Um
and then we are going to address your
questions. And then after that we have a
second part to the evening which are
more informal. Basically, we go
backstage and um not back this way but
back that way into a room where there'll
be some drinks as far as I understand
and we'll be an op- there'll be an
opportunity for us and for you to talk
at a different kind of level, not from
stage to audience but from the same kind
of level. We'll be sitting next to you
and we can have this conversation
together if you have other questions
that weren't addressed during the
official time so to speak.
Now, let me ask you something. You
hopefully got a survey
um as you came in and to us because this
is a grant-based program, right? We I
got this grant to promote this
connection between the humanities and
the sciences from the Templeton
Foundation. I need to show them that
people care by answering the survey. So,
please if you want this to happen and
keep happening again, hopefully next
year again here for our fourth year,
please do fill the survey and somebody
will be collecting that
on the outside. All right. So, without
much ado,
let me introduce our two speakers. So,
Elizabeth Kolbert has been a staff
writer at The New Yorker since 1999.
Her three-part series on global warming,
The Climate of Man, won the 2006
National Magazine Award for Public
Interest among other honors. She
received a Lannan Literary Fellowship in
2006 and a Heinz Award in 2010
and won the 2010 National Magazine Award
for Reviews and Criticism.
She is the author of The Prophet of Love
and Other Tales of Power and Deceit,
Field Notes from a Catastrophe which is
now available in paperback, and finally
The Sixth Extinction for which she won
the 2015 Pulitzer Prize for General
Nonfiction. So, everybody please welcome
Elizabeth to the stage. Liz.
Thank you.
So, you
Well, I took all the way to the other
side.
Yeah. Yeah.
And then I have Siddhartha Mukherjee who
is a pioneering physician, oncologist,
and author.
A very influential voice in the
scientific community. He's best known
for his books The Emperor of All
Maladies, A Biography of Cancer which
earned him the 2011 Pulitzer Prize, and
The Gene, An Intimate History which was
recognized by the Washington Post and
The New York Times as one of the most
influential books of 2016.
The Emperor of All Maladies was adapted
into a documentary by Ken Burns and
included among Time's 100 Best
Nonfiction Books of the Past Century.
So, Sid, please join us. Thank you.
Good.
Very good. So, we now um we're going to
start and the first one to speak will be
Sid tonight. So, Sid, take it on and
Well, thank you very much for uh
picking such a easy topic I know. to
start with. Small moderate topic. Um
I thought I would begin with um
a thought experiment. Um and the thought
experiment goes like this. Um
if you were in the uh sitting in the
1850s.
Um you and you ask the question, what is
it like to get old?
Uh what is it like to live beyond
50 years old?
Someone might say to you it was a
horrible life.
Your teeth fall out.
Your hair degenerates. Your skin
degenerates. It's a terrible thing and
what we should really do is respect
human boundaries and dignity
and let people die quietly at 50.
Um
it fast forward a few years and all of a
sudden those realities, your skin
degenerating, your hair degenerating,
your body, your mind falling apart,
starts to change because all of a sudden
we begin to make important advances,
scientific advances, cultural advances,
advances in public health hygiene. When
all of a sudden 50 isn't a boundary.
And that same person who told you, you
know, why not just give up at 50?
Terrible life out there.
Um would start saying, well, actually
now 60s sounds good.
And so on and so forth. 60s become 70s.
So, there are two strands
in
our
understanding of longevity of the body.
One strand constantly reminding us that
death and aging and
uh
the end is nothing but inevitable and
that's of course true.
But on the other hand another strand
pushing and saying, well, what's
inevitable about it? What is it about
certain organisms live much longer.
There's no, you know, what are the
biological limits? Well, the biological
limits are defined by what we want to
understand and how we want to push them.
So,
I think that there is as as a physician,
as an oncologist, as someone who works
in cancer,
you feel both these strands.
And it's important to remember that the
two strands exist absolutely true. It's
absolutely true that there is a a kind
of collapse of dignity when you begin to
say, you know, let's all live till till
100 and that changes and distorts
certain ways of thinking about culture.
But on the other hand let's not forget
that as I said 100 years ago people
would say living beyond 50 was a
horrible life.
So, with that
as a kind of background, um
I thought I would propose to you
um
three potential visions
of longevity or immortality. Um
and they're quite different from each
other and they have each one has a
very different consequence about how we
think about human future.
Um the first one
is the most traditional one.
And that's the one that we've grown up
with
in a kind of cultural sense.
And that's simple. It's it's it's
immortality viewed in the in the
negative or in the double negative and
that's simply if you killed all the
killers,
you would achieve
infinite longevity or at least
true longevity.
This is the stuff that I came into my
sort of professional life, my
scientific life,
take diseases away.
Um remove uh cancer,
heart disease,
um and other other such diseases,
uh
infectious diseases in the last
um so-called
you know, if you look at the
If you look at human history, it's an
astonishing history in the last 100
years because um
the conquest of communicable diseases,
so-called infectious diseases, um
lengthened
uh
human lives, human longevity, whether
that conquest was through public health
measures or however we achieved them, a
mixture of things, mostly public health
and hygiene, some vaccination, of course
some use of antibiotics
uh among among those things.
That changed the epidemiology of human
disease. We would all Most of us would
be dead in this in this audience. We
would be all long gone. Um a 100 120
years uh odd years ago.
Uh
virtually none of us would be here,
actually.
Um
So, um and then the
the the epidemiology, the face of human
disease began to shift and become uh
more and more focused on these so-called
non-communicable diseases, so much so
that it feels these days that the
division of the
world between non-communicable diseases
and communicable diseases,
infectious and non-infectious diseases,
is a little bit like saying mammals can
be divided into cows and non-cows. Um
that's because the category of non-cows,
non-communicable diseases, heart
disease, cancer, even in countries that
you wouldn't imagine,
uh even in parts of the world where you
would think that the burden of
communicable diseases is enormous, the
pattern is shifting so dramatically um
that there's an expectation for instance
in a country like just to pick one out
of that, Tanzania, um more people will
die from hyper- the complications of
hypertension than they will die of the
complications of various infectious
diseases in 10 years. That's one one
kind of one kind of So, this gives you
sense of the changing nature of
epidemiology. So, but to go back to the
question, if you kill all the killers,
um if you remove the
uh constraints or the barriers to
long life, then you would actually in-
increase human longevity
uh enormously. And of course there's a
truth to that.
But then came a second vision, which
began to appear, um and it comes from a
variety of sources.
Uh and I'll name I'll talk about the
sources. It turns out that if you look
at people who have extreme longevity,
people who live
120 years, 118, 108, 110, what's
interesting about those people is that
they are not killed by killers.
They in fact are dying from diseases
that we don't think of as diseases. So,
they for instance die of peculiar forms
of bacterial sepsis. Their immune system
collapses.
Um
They sometimes die of broken bones.
My laboratory, actually we study bone
for we found stem cells that make bones.
There's this project that we're doing
right now to try to find people with
extreme uh longevity to ask the
question, what happens to stem cells in
their bone? We discovered these stem
cells some years ago. We're trying to
put them in back into human beings.
Uh they make stem they make bone and
cartilage among other things. Um so,
um
So, the second idea is that sure, you
can remove you can take away the
killers, you can kill the killers, but
there may be changes that prospectively,
outside removing the killers, there may
be genetic or biological, epigenetic, or
other changes that would allow us to
extend human longevity without focusing
on the killers. So, in other words,
there are genes or diets or bionic
mechanisms
by which you could alter your lifespan
in a positive way. So, imagine I would
find a a a gene in in in a in a small
animal um that um increases longevity
enormously. Um and such genes have been
found. Interestingly, many of them have
to do with the way we regulate
metabolism.
Um
Many of them have to have a very careful
there's a very careful balance between
those genes and the capacity of of them
to tip into cancer. Um And so, um
there's a very very tricky balance, but
occasionally you can find genetic means
um of changing uh
the limits of human longevity. And one
interesting consequence that arises out
of that is to say, well, forget about
killing all the killers. Maybe we should
be tampering with human genomes so that
we can increase longevity um
I would say I we were talking about this
a little bit before in trans, which
means that they suppress all the other
effects. They would override any other
effects, and it would be non-disease
specific. It's not as if you would they
would essentially override the effects
of of diseases.
And such Do such genes exist? Yes, they
exist in other animals. They exist in
worms and in flies. You can make worms
that are three live three times longer
than other worms.
Um often these genetic means cluster
along pathways um along um very
particular ways. Often they cluster
around metabolic uh pathways. Um
And
uh for a long time,
you would imagine that these
alterations, unless all of a sudden
there appeared a genetic mutation, a
genetic variation in humans that would
spontaneously arise and that could give
that kind of longevity, you would
imagine it would be very hard to tamper
with this physiology. Um
But
certainly you can tamper with the
physiology in other animals, worms as I
said before. Um
And now, one thing we'll talk a little
bit about with new genetic tools,
um it's possible to tamper with the
human genome um in principle. And when
you do that, again remember you can do
it in two ways. You can remove
the natural you may you can remove
constrainers, um and we can we'll talk a
little bit about that. But also you can
um change in a positive direction. You
can not just remove the constraints, you
can influence in a positive direction
just like in small animals. And here the
world splits into generally speaking two
kinds of camps. Um One camp would
suggest that
longevity and all these complex traits
um are so complicated
that there'll be
many many genes and possibly across the
just to give you a sense of what the
scope of the problem is, if you um were
to take the human genome and you were to
uh print it out um in standard print
format, um it would be about a single
human genome would be a 66 full volumes
of the Encyclopedia Britannica.
So, um this room wall to wall up all
over would be
Elizabeth's genome.
Um
And
and in the past, of course, it was
largely inscrutable. So, this is written
in just four letters. It would be If you
opened up one volume, it would read ACT
GCTT
TGC That's not I'm making it up. I
didn't memorize the sequence, but um
So, in the past,
our capacity to read that information
was extraordinarily limited. Um
You could say on page in volume
36 on page
72,
um
I have a genetic sequence that encodes
for the cystic fibrosis gene. And if you
change this letter to that letter, you
can go from a normal cystic fibrosis
gene to an abnormal one. And if you have
two copies of that and so forth, then
you could make some conclusions about
it.
So, these were single genetic changes
which we could map onto
human traits, diseases, and so forth.
Now, um we are getting to a place where
we're actually beginning to read this
information with in a powerfully uh in a
powerful manner. This is I call this
reading. Um Just to give you a sense of
how powerful that can be and how
disruptive um that can be, um I just
read a paper
uh 2 weeks ago, still in preprint, uh
where they took um human height as a
characteristic. Um
Now, height's a very interesting
characteristic because we know it's
highly heritable. Tall parents tend to
have tall kids. Shorter parents tend to
have shorter kids. This was known for a
long time.
But for decades, people had been trying
to find so-called a gene for height,
single genes for height. And for most
human variation, um they were very hard
to find. Um and we knew that there were
probably um tens of thousands of
variations. There are only 20,000 genes,
but the lettering is very wide. So,
there were tens of thousands of human
variations that would explain
ultimately, each with small effect,
um that would explain height.
Um
The problem, of course, was that in
order to decipher that, you would have
to have uh
uh you have to create a compendium of
all human beings and all their heights,
find all their genome sequences, and try
to find a machine, a computer or an
algorithm that would correlate one with
the other.
And there was not
all of these resources didn't exist. But
it turns out now they do exist and this
particular paper
uses a powerful computational algorithm
to predict human height from genetic
information alone. Take away
malnutrition, that's a very important
constraint. This is assuming no
malnutrition, assuming no environmental
change, we'll come back to that in a
second. From human genetic information
alone.
Now, think about that for a second. That
means that in principle you would be
able to predict the height of your
unborn fetus
before that child was ever born. You
would know what height they would
attain.
And now think about extending this
potentially to other
attributes.
Color of hair, the
color of your skin.
And all of a sudden you've gone into
territory which I think all of us
would feel a little uncomfortable with.
Longevity
rides along similar principles. We don't
have fundamental notions about it, but
it would be very very clear that the
heritable part of longevity, the part
that can be inherited,
will begin to be solved and in fact
that's a project going on right now.
This is the great one of the great
biobank projects of longevity. So
then we will be able to read longevity.
And if there are genes which very
strongly influence longevity or if there
are genes that very strongly influence
longevity in a negative direction, we
should we can potentially change those.
There happens to be one already, a big
candidate,
a gene that increases your risk for
neurological syndromes,
Alzheimer's disease, neurodegenerative
diseases called ApoE.
And someone like George Church and
others
have made a compelling argument, why not
take it away from the human genome?
Why not remove that? Why live with this
constraint if you don't have to live
with this constraint? So that would be
the second vision of of
longevity tipping into far edges of
mortality. It's not immortality, but far
edges.
And then the last one is perhaps the
most intriguing one. I've been thinking
about this as a thought experiment for a
long time and wondering and I the
question that I posed to myself a while
ago was
could there be a soft version of
immortality? Could we hack it?
And by that I mean
not inventing crazy new tools, but what
if someone gave me the toolkit of what's
available? Could I make a kind of soft
immortality possible?
And I began to think about the following
experiment,
thought experiment. Um
I'm going to write kind of a I'm going
to write more about it because I've been
thinking more and more about it. So
let's say I Here's the thought
experiment. Let's say I
Let's say I used you, Elizabeth, as an
example. Um
we are quite confident that we could
clone you. Um
So
you can clone most mammals.
That it's not easy, but within limits I
think the possibility of cloning is
becoming more and more more and more
clear. If it's not cloning, we could
even do a soft version of cloning in
which we would derive in which we would
derive sperm and eggs from your normal
cells, combine them and basically
recreate a soft version of a clone.
So it wouldn't be the Dolly version of
the clone which is more complicated in
which you have to take a another
nucleus, sorry, another cell out
suck up the nucleus and then reinject it
with your nucleus, thereby creating a
clone. We could do it a bunch of
different ways. You could recreate
basically sperm and eggs in principle
from someone's cells and then combine
them again. So let's assume for a second
that we would be able to do the cloning
piece of it. And then here's the
experiment which is that what what
struck me was that the cost of digital
recording
of all your experiences
is diminishing so dramatically that you
could basically wear a GoPro
and walk around.
And you could edit your GoPro. You could
edit your GoPro as you aged and you
could say, "These memories were really
significant for me. You know, that time
I went to Rio and sat on the beach, that
moment I experienced that glacier, etc."
So my question was, "What if we began to
clone ourselves and then give our clones
the capacity and this is not even fancy
technology, I'm not talking about brain
interfaces. I'm just saying give them a
GoPro. Give them a quick GoPro lesson on
your life
in which they would absorb and perhaps
even experience
the what you thought were the
fundamentally important pieces of you.
So you would have yourself in a second
generation now absorbing pieces of you.
What's interesting about the experiment
is that it's infinitely repeatable. Your
clone makes a clone, gives a GoPro to
the clone, etc. etc. etc. And of course
information is lost.
It's not going to be your life.
But I just keep wondering about this
idea. It
haunts me a lot. I mean, what if I would
do that? Would it alleviate some
concerns that I have about my end?
I would end, but
you know, very important pieces of me
would be left over, a genetic copy would
be left over, a true genetic copy would
be left over and, you know, things I
treasured, my my most important memories
would be here. So
anyway, it's dystopic, of course, but
you know, yesterday's dystopias are
tomorrow's old news. So um
there's there's a quality about this
that makes you think. This is a thought
experiment, but makes you think about
and then the question of course becomes,
"Well, what happens to human population
then? How do we
crisscross?" So I'm going to stop there.
That's kind of a broad introduction, but
those were my three visions of of
longevity tipping into the edges of
immortality. That's great. Thank you
very much. And now we go for the macro
view. Yeah, speaking of dystopia. Um
So that was like a perfect right in a
perfect perfect lead-in and I um am
supposed to I guess represent the
humanities here. I'm up here with two
scientists and the humanities always
are, you know, get the short end of the
stick, the bum end of the stick. Um and
so I'm going to I'm going to talk about,
you know, so talked about immortality
and I I'm going to I'm going to really
flip that around and I think that there
are there is a really interesting
conversation. It's not a conversation,
maybe it's a it's something much worse
than that. How's that? We can a brawl.
Um
And and that is I'm going to talk about
what human
humans have meant to the rest, you know,
that that we don't really know how many
species um
exactly there are on the planet. The
rough estimates are about 10 million. Um
we have named maybe 1.5 million of them.
So there's a lot of life out there that
we sort of, you know, from statistical
tools are out there, but we really don't
know what it is um still at this point
in 2018. Um but we know that we're, you
know, destroying it uh pretty rapidly.
And the um
the reasons for this, you know, have a
lot to do. They're the flip side
of our tremendous success at staving off
disease, at reproducing, at feeding
ourselves, all the things that have
brought us to the point where we're
there now 7.6
billion people on the planet heading
very rapidly. You know, we'll hit eight
in the next couple
couple of years actually.
Um and if you want to know exactly you
can go there's like a world population
clock and you can watch that thing spin
around by the, you know, not just by the
one or two or three, but by the 10,000s,
you know, every every few minutes.
Um as as our population grows. So
um
what are the So I I I wrote, you know, I
I wrote this book about this idea that
we are causing uh a mass extinction. So
so what is a mass extinction? A mass
extinction is a is a
it's just considered a a period of time,
a short period of time, relatively short
on a geological scale, when a lot of the
diversity of the planet for whatever
reason crashes and um this idea that
there's a sixth extinction obviously
implies there've been five previous
ones. There have been, lo and behold. Um
the first
occurred 440 million years ago during a
a period known as the Ordovician period
when when life was still uh largely
confined to the water. So about three
quarters of all marine species died out
and very few on land cuz there were very
few on land. And the
most familiar one of these mass
extinctions is the fifth um which did in
the dinosaurs 66 million years ago. And
there's a pretty broad scientific
consensus now uh that that one was
caused by an asteroid. And for a long
time people tried to find common themes
in these extinctions, you know, is there
one reason why they happen? They happen
at irregular periods. Um and no one has
found yet, you know, the key, what
causes a mass extinction. Um but the
general sort of
theme of them is that the world changes
in some way faster than evolution can
keep up with, right? So so it all does
boil down to genetics. Um so if I'm a
you know, a worm or a
plant, I can only keep up with
environmental change by either I have
enough plasticity, you know, I have
enough adaptability. If I if I can't go
here, I go there. If I can't use this
food source, I go that food source. So
all organisms have a certain amount of
plasticity. Um
but
the other way I adapt by by make a big
adaptations is is is through, you know,
mutations, through genetic, through
evolution, right? I evolve. I become a
new creature. And that's, you know,
propelled life throughout the last three
and a half, you know, billion years or
so. So if things change really fast and
I don't have the plasticity and I can't
evolve fast enough, uh the end is near.
That's That's the end of the line uh for
my species. And what are we humans
doing?
Uh we've sort of transcended evolution
in a really, really important sense. And
this gets to a lot of the things that
Sid was talking about. We don't wait
around to evolve, right? If we If we
have a new pathogen, uh when you go to
get, you know, a flu shot, right? That
flu evolved uh into a new virus, um but
you got the vaccine, and you skipped
that evolutionary step, right? So, the
flu didn't just kill off everyone who
wasn't immune to it. Uh
we jumped over that. And that's And
that's why we've we've done so well, why
we've extended our own lives, why we're
we're so successful. But the flip side
of that um are these massive changes
that we are making to the planet on a on
a geological scale. I'm sure everyone
in this room has heard this concept that
we're in a new geological epoch, the
Anthropocene. Um an epoch is actually
to a geologist a very small amount of
time. Um there have been many people who
believe we're in a new geological
period. So, and the last we're, you
know, we're in the um
What are we in? The Neogene or something
like that. But we we we may be in a
whole new period uh of time, a very big
geological divide, because we have So,
we're changing the planet on such a
scale and such at such a rate and at
such a scale. So, I'm just going to
throw out a couple of the ways we're
doing that. Unfortunately, I could spend
all night talking about how we're doing
that, but I I will not. Uh I will turn
this over to a conversation. Um we're
changing the climate really fast. We're
putting up CO2 uh really, really fast
into the atmosphere, um perhaps as fast
as, you know, has ever happened in
Earth's history.
Um
And when you think about it, it makes
sense. It's really hard to put CO2 into
the air, right? So, all the fossil fuels
that we are burning are just carbon that
a plant absorbed during its lifetime.
The plant died, and for complicated
geological reasons didn't decompose, but
became a fossil fuel. That process took
hundreds of millions of years, and we
are now digging up those stores of
fossil fuels, we're burning them, let's
say, in a matter of a couple of
centuries. So, that's really, really
rapid. And if people weren't here, how
could that be happening? Uh we're
acidifying the oceans. That same CO2
that we're throwing up into the air
that's changing the climate is changing
the chemistry of the oceans. Um we are
very rapidly altering the surface of the
Earth. When we go in, you know, to the
Amazon, or or you you know, when people
came to the US and mowed down the
prairies and planted corn, that's a
monoculture, that's a place where very,
very few um creatures can survive.
Everyone's heard about, you know,
monarchs are crashing monarch butterfly
populations. That's because, you know,
we go in to what was used to be their
habitat, we just mow it down, put down
herbicides, plant corn, and there's just
nothing for them to eat. It's as simple
as that. Um Other ways, we are moving
things around the world. This one
doesn't get as much attention as it
probably should, um but, you know, over
the vast span of evolutionary time,
uh you know, the continents have divided
um
All the continents used to be squished
together um
about 250 million years ago into a
continent called we call Pangea. Then
the continents split apart, the world as
we know it came into being.
Evolutionary lineages have been evolving
separately for tens of millions of
years, and then we bring them together,
right? You got a, you know, you got a
Africa after someone from Africa comes
here, um you know, all you got to Asia,
vice versa. We're moving We're moving
goods around, we're moving people
around, we're moving viruses around,
we're moving fungi around. And just to
give one really local example of what
happens
uh is people have probably heard of a
white-nose syndrome killing bats all
across the US. That was a fungal
disease, a fungus brought over from
Europe, probably totally unwittingly by
someone that's just killed um millions
and millions of bats. So,
often times um when people try to date
when did the An- Anthropocene begin, uh
they use one date, you know, that is
used as a beginning of the use of fossil
fuels, and another is post-war when
human population really, really took
off. Um so, all of these questions of
what
what we're going to do, you know, to
enhance our own lives, um unfortunately,
are coming at the expense of all these
other species with whom we share the
planet. And that is I unfortunately have
come to believe a pretty inevitable
conflict, cuz there's only there's only
a certain amount of space, and there's
only a certain amount of resources uh on
planet Earth. Um
And then, just to bring things full
circle, and then I'll hand it back over
to Marcelo, you know, there's going to
be all these questions, well, we killed
off this, we killed off that. Can we
bring it back? You know, can we use its
genome? We now are so sophisticated, uh
we can just take uh you know, people
have mapped the genome of the
Neanderthal. Can we Can we recreate a
Neanderthal, right? Just reprogram a
human cell to be a Neanderthal, or an
elephant cell to be a mammoth? Uh those
questions, uh if we're all around in a
technologically advanced society like
today's, uh 100 years from now, which
I'm not 100% sure of, uh are going to be
very, very urgent. Um and and we'll
we'll be debating them very, very
heatedly. So, with that, I'm going to
That's great. Thank you very much. So,
so it's So, maybe this GoPro clone thing
is not so bad.
You just get one. You just get one one
yourself.
Yeah, you one one of yourself.
don't kid just Okay, shrinking
population, yeah.
That's Yeah. Well, look,
we could we could combine forces, yeah.
Exactly. Exactly. So, so I think that's
great, because you kind of nailed it.
There's a There's a clear tension
between these two narratives here,
right? If on the one hand, there's
science as the conqueror of all
maladies, including death, view viewed
perhaps as a disease that can be cured
in some way, right? Um And let's do
that. And And I have a somewhat very
visceral aversion to to scientism, the
idea that science actually has answers
to all questions, because it does not,
for sure. Uh and and it's highly
debatable, I think, if death is
something that we can really deal with
for many reasons, even invoking physics
and the second law of thermodynamics. I
mean, in sense of every time you
solve a problem, every time you kill one
of the killers,
other killers show up, right? I mean,
this has been
You You're one of the
best historians of medicine around, and
you know this is true. And the question
is, can we ever Can this
ever end, you know? Is this just part of
the way life manifests itself, right?
But there is this idea that science has
the here. And then, on the other hand,
as you said, you know, there is the
other narrative, which is destruction.
You know, we as a species, in order to
be so many, and in order to live well,
you know, the first thing we need is
energy, is environment, and that
obviously has a tremendous cost. Right?
And
to me, and this is a question I have for
both of you, you know, it's because I
have no idea how to answer that. When
you talk to people about these things,
and I'm sure you both have, I mean,
Elizabeth, when you talk about the sixth
extinction, and you put data in front of
people, and and and you discuss this
with educated people, and they
understand it,
but they don't change.
Why not?
To me, that's mind-boggling.
Well, I think when you
Unfortunately, the more, you know, you
you
You know, I I one thing I want to say,
too, is is that this is not maybe not
really an answer, but um you know,
people have been at this project for for
a really long time, this overcoming of
evolution. And I I I think there's you
know, it would be called debated, but
most, I think, scientists, once again,
I'm going to defer to scientists, would
say you know, humans did in the
megafauna. The megafauna extinction was
really early on. So, humans arrived, you
know, in Australia 50 or even 60,000
years ago. There was a huge wave of
extinction of large animals. Uh they
arrived in in in North America, you
know, probably
15, 20,000 years ago. There was a big
wave of extinctions. We no longer have,
you know, mammoths or mastodons running
around New York, though we have plenty
of skeletons of them.
Um
So, you know, it's not something
that um you know, it's it's a it's a
project I I think, unfortunately, we
we've been at a long time, and it's just
that our tools have gotten a lot better.
And now when we when you think about the
pace of change right now, right? Your
iPhone, your, you know, everything has
been
collected from somewhere on the planet
and has had an impact somewhere on the
planet. And so, you know, the changes
that are required when you have 7.6
billion people on the planet, even if
you just said everyone is simply going
to, you know, needs to eat. That's basic
requirement, a sort of basic human
rights. And these things come into, you
know, really serious conflict pretty,
pretty quickly. Now, if you said, let's
do our best, our absolute best, we would
like everyone on the Earth, you know, to
have a decent life, and we would like we
would still like to preserve as much of
the rest of the planet as possible. Um
Sort of the best proposal I've seen for
that uh is is comes from E.O. Wilson,
and he has a book called Half-Earth,
that we should sort of put aside half of
the of the land surface of the Earth uh
aside for other creatures. And I think
that's a really important uh idea, um
but it turns out, you know, a
multinational project like that, it's
really, really hard to even get it Yeah.
talked about. Of course.
Yeah.
Yeah, I
I think it's something to do with the
amount of pressure that people respond
to at the individual level, you know?
And and unless there's enough pressure,
the threshold,
you haven't gotten to that threshold yet
and you will not do anything. You won't
take shorter showers, you won't you
know, uh
eat less meat, whatever it is, even if
you know that there is a cost to all of
that. And and it's an interesting
reflection to understand what will it
take for people to do something at the
not at the governmental level, but at
the individual level because
um
we have buyers customers and I think
there is a whole emerging idea of
corporate ethics now where some
corporations are beginning to understand
that, "Hey, if you don't like a company,
you stop buying their products." And
they have to change.
And so, you know, you have uh some
companies that you wouldn't expect
getting organic products out there and
stuff like that. But
it's just a reflection that I think we
should we should have um
And you know, in this conversation, you
can always interrupt and ask questions
to one another too. I don't want to
monopolize. I have a a ton of things I'd
like to ask you both. Um okay, I'll ask
uh I'll ask you and I'll say something
about
the dis- discussion about the ethics of
gene manipulation.
You know, where are we with that
conversation?
So, um
let's talk about the technology first
and then let's talk a little bit about
the ethics of of genetic manipulation.
Again, the
the background is this is this reading
and writing paradigm. So, remember, we
are now becoming progressively,
particularly with computational
um powers, becoming progressively able
to read,
um make sense of this encyclopedia, 66
volumes of the encyclopedia.
And then comes the question of writing.
And for a long time, as many of you
know, the writing piece of it, changing
the human genome prospectively, which
would be essentially saying go to page
um and change erase the word
uh
you know,
A C T T
A C T T and change it into C C T T. Um
and that might mean changing a gene like
a mutation in the breast cancer causing
BRCA1 gene and making it the non-breast
cancer causing
so-called normal variant or the wild
type variant. Um
So, um that was uh it was that that
project uh was very badly stuck uh for
for very good reason. So, the the
reasons are very deep and and and
biologically very deep.
So, the biologically they're deep
because, as you can imagine,
um anytime you take information away
from a any genome um is is is a cellular
crisis. Cells are are extraordinarily
sensitive
to their genomes being tampered for a
good reason because they
when that happens, the consequences are
usually quite severe. Cancer is one of
the major consequences that a mutation
that eventually causes cancer. So,
cells, we now know, we're now knowing
more and more, so we've discovered some
of this in our lab and other labs have
many many labs have been have been
working on this. Cells are
extraordinarily sensitive to these kinds
of changes. Um and in general, they were
very hard to deliver.
The the the wormhole, and again, this
goes back to um
taking control of evolution, rapid
control of evolution, the wormhole came
from a very unusual place and we it was
not expected. The wormhole came from
bacteria, my the microbial world and and
it came because of evolution. Um it came
because in the microbial world, the
resources are often so restrictive and
there's a constant cat and mouse game
between microbes to compete and uh with
each other. So, in the microbial world,
what what happened um
many many many many years ago is that um
some bacteria began to be invaded by
viruses.
Um we've reconstructed all of this, by
the way. We don't know if this was this
is true. It's mostly reconstructed.
Bacteria began began to be invaded by
viruses. Viruses are um
parasites. You can think about them they
use the bacterial cell to make more
copies of themselves. They're not living
in this in the traditional sense. They
they parasitize the vi- the bacteria's
body, this genetic apparatus, etc. to
make more copies of itself. That's what
a virus is. So, bacter- So, we knew all
this, but what we began to understand is
that bacteria have a counter-evolution
mechanism. And they evolved a mechanism
basically to detect the DNA of the virus
and make a cut in it.
Uh chop it up. Um and the field sat
there for a long time. Uh this idea that
we
scientists began to recognize that some
bacteria um would could have a
recognition sequence, they could
recognize a virus sequence and deliver
in a a a directed chop not to any other
part of their own genome, that was
protected. It was specific for a
sequence. And I'm going to rephrase
exactly what I said. In other words, the
bacteria could recognize A C T C C G T T
T and chop that section, A C T G C T T
Obviously, if you think a little bit
ahead, you could say to yourself, "Well,
if the vir- if the bacteria can do that,
what if I reengineered the bacteria, put
it into a human cell and now said,
'Instead of going and chopping the
virus, why don't you go chop the human
genome?'"
A C T
As far as the bacterial apparatus is
concerned, it can't tell whether it's a
virus or a human genome. It has no
fundamental mechanism to tell. And in
fact, that's what has happened. In the
last 5 years, we have co-opted this
bacterial immune system, which is an
antiviral system um to chop up or to be
directed to go to page 66 in the
Encyclopedia Britannica of humans of and
and go and make a directed change uh in
in the human geno- genetic material.
Now,
human cells haven't given up. They are
still protesting.
They're saying, "No, no, no, wait a
second. I'm not ready." Um and sometimes
they shut themselves down. So, we're now
but but the technology is
extraordinarily simple um because you
know,
I could tell you that it would take a
post-doc in my laboratory to make a
directed genetic change in a human stem
cell,
it would take on the order of weeks to
months. It now takes 2 days. Uh and
virtually all of them work. And this is
CRISPR. This is CRISPR, yes. But I I I
have a question. So, but once you're
once I had a an infant or an adult,
right? I I can't change all of their
cells, right? So, I have to go at the
moment of conception in there.
So, there are three So, that's and that
that this is this is a very important
question. So, there are three kinds of
changes
um and and we should know about all
three of them. So, one of them is making
changes in all other organisms. So, this
is making using CRISPR to make modified
crops, modified animals, etc. etc.
There, you would change presumably the
sperm and eggs. Actually, you wouldn't
change the sperm and eggs, you would
change the stem cells that make sperm
and eggs.
Um
and the the big debate there, now we're
coming back to your essential question,
the big ethical debate there is the
debate about diversity, biosafety.
That's the central debate and this of
course goes very much into what things
that you think a lot about, Elizabeth.
The second one, the second arena, broad
arena, is making changes in human cells,
but not in sperm and eggs. As long as
they're non-sperm and eggs. So, like
blood-forming stem cells, like stem
cells that make pancreas, the stem cells
that make skin, etc. I'm using the word
stem cells because you make the change
and you let the cells propagate the
change in the body. So, there, the big
safety is concerns about
possible consequences in the person that
this that receives the receives the
cells. The biggest one of them being
cancer. Cancer, cancer, cancer, cancer,
cancer
That the second, number two. And number
one and number two are already being
done. We will find the first
CRISPR-based therapies
in the next We are working on them
ourselves actively. We will find them in
the next 5 years.
Changing human stem cells using
CRISPR-like technologies is here. Um it
is now yesterday's news as far as
science is concerned. The human
experiment needs to be done. We don't
think that it will be
they will cause cancer in the sense that
people are worried about. Maybe they'll
be some.
Uh so so this is a very active area,
lots of debate around this. The third
one, which is the most obviously the
most challenging one, the one that's
most debated
is uh making changes in sperm and eggs
or rather stem cells that make sperm and
eggs.
And if you take that, the third arena,
um
this is different from all the other two
because this change is permanently
heritable through the human genome. That
this is a prospective change.
Technologically, there's no fundamental
reason it cannot be done. Um
And the most surprising piece, and then
I'll stop, the most surprising piece
that's emerged in the last 3 years, at
least to me, is that we had thought that
you know, big groups were put together,
National Academy, a National Institute
was put together, a conference. We had
thought that they would say, "Absolutely
not." for human genetic change. In fact,
what they said is for diseases that have
extraordinary suffering
in humans um that we should be allowed
to explore this arena for human beings.
Um that was the first recommendation.
This will change. This is an evolving
conversation. But that was a big line in
the sand that we have just about we're
we are going to be able to cross. We're
going to say that for diseases that
cause extraordinary human suffering
uh potentially a gene like APOE, we
should be able to um we should be able
to make a prospective genetic change in
human sperm and eggs. Um
This is a wide debate. This is not going
to close tomorrow. Um
but uh that's where the that's where
we're sitting right now.
It's interesting that this is I think
the 200th anniversary of the publication
of Frankenstein. Uh-huh.
Which was a cautionary tale precisely
about, you know, how far science can go
without messing things up big time,
right? Because
you know, everybody watches the movie,
but if you read the novel
and I can't see you right now, but I
wonder how many would raise their hands
saying, "Did you read the novel, you
know?" And the novel is about the
monster not being like Mr. Abinormal in
the brain, but actually being a genius,
having the the the brain of a genius,
and
begging the the doctor, Victor
Frankenstein, for a companion, a female
companion. And then when the doctor
realizes that his experiment first
worked and second could create a a race
of of of
monsters which are much more powerful,
stronger, and brighter than humans, he
panics. And hence comes the drama.
So, you know, it's a the reason why I
bring this up is first because it's you
have to in a night like this, but also
because
imagine that we get there, right? That
we can do this. And you know, you can
put as much legislation as you want, you
know, in scientific practice, but it's a
bit of a Pandora's Box, you know, once a
scientific idea is out in the world, you
just can't put it back in. And there
will be groups that will be doing it for
the wrong reasons.
Right? And some groups will be doing it
because they can pay to do it. And so,
you know, if cuz the therapies may be
very expensive, and so you start having
a sort of uh
unevenness in society of those that can
take advantage of that and have their
kids be super smart, super beautiful,
super etc., you know, and those that
can't. And you go into the brave new
world scenario.
Yeah, there's but just to just to temper
some of that. I mean, you know, there
Please temper it. there are many
Let me just to temper it very clearly.
You know, as I said, there are there is
a substantial camp of people who
correctly believe
that tampering with human and animal
genomes is going to be fundamentally
restricted by the fact that typical
traits that we want to influence are are
run through tens of thousands of loci in
the human genome. And changing so and
you can't you basically you cannot use
CRISPR in that sense. You can't tell
CRISPR
you get into a numerical problem. You
can't tell CRISPR to change tens of
thousands of you know, CRISPR evolved,
as I said,
to make very directed changes in very
directed loci in the human genome. Now,
there is a smaller other camp that says,
"That's not true." It says that sure,
there could be tens of thousands of
variations in the human genome that
influence a single trait, but somewhere
along there either that you could create
a synthetic gene
completely outside
a biological known biology, or there's a
natural gene variant which will override
all of this We talk about overriding
genes. And we've seen examples I'll give
you one great example that height is
controlled by tens of thousands of loci,
maybe hundreds of thousands of loci
across the human genome, and yet one
gene like the Marfan syndrome gene
can override all of many of these and
cause extreme extreme changes in human
height. Uh
I can give you several other examples
examples of this.
These this second camp
um
believes that that there'll be more
examples of that. And in fact, the most
perhaps the most uh challenging example
is that in animal studies we now know
that
maze solving cognitive abilities of
animals
very poor measure ultimately, but but
some things that capture some cognitive
ability of an animal again controlled by
tens of thousands of genes
um and yet actually only a couple by
influencing two or three of them, you
can get an a maze solving animal genius.
Um so, if you now translate that into
the human world, you all of a sudden get
So, so so let me just to temper a little
bit we there are camps out there. I
would say the latter camp is a minority.
The former camp that believes complex
human variation is going to be tough to
tackle using these mechanisms is a
majority. But but maybe Elizabeth, I'll
ask you a question about that. What do
you think about um
bringing back
um biodiversity using these
uh new metrics or new Are you
enthusiastic about that or are you Well,
all it's like all roads lead to George
Church um who has spoken a Harvard
geneticist who had spoken about bringing
back a mammoth, you know, that that
actually um
uh Asian elephants and mammoths are
quite closely related um more closely I
believe than African and Asian elephants
and um
and that we could just, you know, trick
you know, we could rejigger an Asian
elephant and get and get a mammoth. Um
you know, I think that there are a bunch
of things to be said for that besides
you know, let's let's just assume for a
moment that we could overcome the
hurdles which are great because as soon
as an animal is extinct and dead, it
recreating its genome becomes, you know,
extremely difficult. But let's say we
have an animal
we
are driving it to the edge of
extinction. We take a live animal, we
just, you know, sequence its DNA, pretty
easy to do right now, uh bank it,
uh and then we decide let's let's bring
it you know, let's bring this animal
um back.
There's a lot of questions you have to
ask. One is um
you know, why did it go extinct in the
first place, you know? So, you're not
going to you know, you're not going to
be able to a lot of animals if you've
been being done in by disease, if it's
being done in by an you know, a
predator, an invasive predator, for
example, you put them back out there,
you're just going to have the same
problem all over again. So, you got to
deal with that. Um but I think a more
profound question, and this actually
gets back to your clone with a GoPro um
is what is what is identity, right? So,
you know, there's a case right now, and
this is not a this is not sci-fi at all.
It's a very simple case of of
um conservation biology where they had a
species of of the Hawaiian crow um very
got down to really really low numbers.
It's a distinctive species from our crow
here in the continental US.
Um considered sacred by native
Hawaiians, down to like 20 birds. They
did all sorts of things, set up a
breeding facility, you double clutch
birds, you take the the
uh eggs, the birds will lay another egg,
uh you raise the bird by you know,
people raise the bird, blah blah blah.
You can do all these things. They
brought it back to a point of having
maybe 150 birds. Just recently put some
of them back out in this forest which
they'd very carefully, you know, tried
to get rid of predators, blah blah blah.
And it's killed their the first ones
were killed by hawks because they didn't
know how to defend themselves from
hawks. They hadn't been
trained. So, you know, an animal is not
just a collection of genes. It's a it's
a it's a We know more we learn it's a
lot of culture. The clone needed a
GoPro.
The crow Well, there you have it.
will teach the GoPro transmit to the
clone. Exactly. But I'm thinking about
my clone doesn't want to
watch my memories. It's not interested
in my memories. And I actually I
actually have clones. I have identical
twins. So, I have clones. And I always
wanted them to write about I am a clone,
but they never wanted to do it.
But they're actually very different
people. They've had very similar
experiences, and they have, you know,
identical genetics, not epigenetics
perhaps, but identical underlying
genetics, and they're still very
different people. So, I'm not sure I see
the point of all that.
Yeah, well
That was not a question. Well, I know
because to to a very high extent we are
defined by our memories.
You know, and and the clone may look
like you, but it's just a thing, you
know, it's not you anymore. And of
course, if you go talk to real
transhumanists, they're going to say,
"No problem. In the future, we're going
to be able to store the essence of your
consciousness in a digital program, and
as long as you back it up, you're going
to keep having it. So, you can always
reimplant it in the brain of your
clone."
Now, this is what I was saying. This is
this is my soft version of it.
This is exactly. So, the This is GoPro
plus.
Exactly. Anyways, we we have to move on
because we have to
have some questions here from the
audience. Here it goes. So,
so how was that I think that's for you,
Sid. How was in vitro fertilization
perceived at its advent? Do you
anticipate that using CRISPR to modify
embryos will eventually become as
acceptable to society as IVF is now?
Um so, that's im- important questions.
So, um
you know, when in vitro fertilization
was first conceived, it was conceived as
a mechanism to get over uh
a terrible
uh burden which was infertility and the
capacity uh you know, people's desire to
have children. That was the that was the
original driver
um
for that. And so, um
what's interesting about it um as as as
you very well know is that it moved from
and it has remained very much in that
arena. Um
But it also enables it becomes also
enabling technology even though it
wasn't And this is a this I'm trying to
make a general principle out of this.
Which is that although it was invented
for the purposes of solving
um an illness
it became enabling technology. It has
become enabling technology for
prospective genetic change that may not
have to do with illness.
Um and so, the And by that I mean that
because the
uh because the egg is outside the the
human body,
um you can do things that you couldn't
do in the human body
uh including things that I just talked
about before. You could do selections
for um for different And And that in
interestingly has nothing to do with
CRISPR, right? So that has to only has
to do with reading the genome. So if you
can read the individual genomes of in
vitro fertilized
embryos, you can select one versus the
other.
And in fact, many of the proponents of
many of the people who worked or think
about genetic change say that as far as
constraining the field of human genetic
or genomic changes, that's enough.
That's sufficient. That you can
unless you want to make changes that are
introduced into the human genome, things
that are entirely foreign to the human
genome, you don't need to do very much.
You can by by embryonic selection, you
can achieve virtually anything that the
CRISPR mandate of extraordinary
suffering has to do. You you can remove
any forms of extraordinary suffering
given again given constraints just by
that technology alone.
Okay, Elizabeth. So
So how optimistic or pessimistic are you
with respect to the future of humanity
in a planet that is changing so fast?
Well,
I mean, I think that humans
you know, precisely one one of the
complexities here is that we are so
so adaptable and so clever and such
great tool
manufacturers that we
are you know, thinking of you know,
mucking around with the genetics of of
everything on Earth or just to name, you
know, one of an infinite number of
examples. Um
So, you know, optimistic pessimistic, I
think it really gets into you know, are
we going to do ourselves in?
You know, quite possibly, you know,
we've had the capacity to do that ever
since, you know, Robert Oppenheimer
said, you know, I am
death, the destroyer or whatever, you
know, so that's now we're going on
uh you know, over over more than 70
years, right? One of the first Trinity
test. Um
So, you know, and that's not a very long
time in the history of the planet to
have a capacity to destroy the planet.
So the fact that we haven't done it yet
doesn't make me that wildly optimistic.
Um
But But but is it Yes. Yes.
There's a kind of
there's a moral syndrome that's building
around not tampering with human genomes.
Um
It's not clear to me that there should
be a moral syndrome around not tampering
with genomes.
No, I'm I'm not I'm not really not
arguing What's the morality?
Why should we not I mean, you know, I I
can Why shouldn't we tamper with the
genome? Of of every
Again, let me talk I mean, again, this
remember this argument came with and I
talk I'm I'm talking about genomes in
general. Remember this argument came
before a panel the the the CRISPR
argument came before a panel and it was
you know, the most vociferous people who
argued at the panel were patient
advocates, people whose children are
affected with terrifying diseases, women
with
Uh so so I just want to be just again
just to just to resound a note that yes,
it sounds horrible, you know, we'll
destroy the environment etc. etc. etc.
But there is
there is also on the other hand, I mean,
you know, we I think I think it we we
it's it's
it's fair to say that scientists aren't
doing this because we are
fundamentally Frankensteinian, you know?
No, I I I did not want to accuse you
personally.
But and I didn't want to accuse
scientists in general and I think, you
know, look we we are all eating GMOs,
you know, every day whether we whether
we want to or not and it's feeding a lot
of the world and I I'm not
I I'm simply saying that we do have so
many capacities to change the world on
such a fundamental level and that's from
the macro level of, you know,
blowing ourselves to smithereens and
changing the atmosphere and changing the
chemistry of the oceans
to the micro level that I sort of feel
like all bets are off. I don't know
where this is going. So would you be
would would it would it be more I mean,
I can tell you I would be satisfied. But
would you be happier
because the because the debate
for GMOs, I can give you the GMO debate.
It's not a GMO versus, you know, go and
shop in Whole Foods debate, right?
Right. Yep. The the the debate for GMOs
across the world is either GMO versus
CMO, chemically modified organisms,
which we've been using for the last
spraying insecticides, putting which
dumps twice as much toxins in the oceans
etc. That's the reality. Well, I I I
have I am going to push back on that cuz
a lot of GMOs are modified so we can put
more chemicals on them. So that's Okay,
fair enough.
So so here's here's my question to you.
I mean, is it do you think it's a it's a
complete pipe dream that we would So you
going back to E.O. Wilson, is a complete
pipe dream that we would have we have
hungry mouths to feed? We whether we
could feed half of India without the
high yielding varieties of rice is a
question or wheat is a question mark. I
mean, should we what's the other option?
What's the middle road? Is the middle
road that we make seed banks and is
there no middle road? Are we are we
doomed down this road? Should we do we
should we be CRISPRing things so that we
restrain ourselves? I mean, that that's
also a possibility, right? We could use
CRISPR as a police. Um we could be
restraining ourselves in a variety of
ways. I actually went to visit one of
the seed banks. There there many now. Um
Is there a middle road or are we are we,
you know, once we're driving down this
road, it ends with
monoculture and and or with with people,
you know,
not being able to shop at at Whole
Paycheck for their
Well, I I think all these things pre
that question I I think
you know, once again, you're like one
one human, you know, one humanity's
major's opinion, which is is as to be
honest not worth that much, but I will
offer it since I'm sitting up here. Um
You know, you're you're all these things
are presupposing a kind of orderliness
to the world. Is there a middle ground?
Could we, you know, use genetic
modification to come up with some
really, you know, great crops, intensely
farm certain areas of the world, leave
other areas of the world unfarmed and,
you know, get through to a moment when
population starts to fall and blah blah
blah. You know, in theory, yes. Now look
at in the chaos of the world today, we
were having a conversation at dinner
about what's going to happen in Brazil.
We all know what's happening in the USA.
We can go down the list and say, okay,
is that going to happen? So I I bring to
this um
you know,
not a very high level of um
you know, just I think an ordinary
American's level of skepticism about,
you know,
we have to decide to do things. We
cannot decide as a world that we should
reduce carbon emissions, okay? Nothing
could be simpler. That is the simplest,
you know, step. We have to reduce carbon
emissions. That's like step one. We have
technologies or simple ones. They're
called, you know, windmills and solar
cells to start to make a dent in this
problem and we are not doing it. So the
idea that we're going to come up with
some great construct and, you know, yes,
it's theoretically possible. Do I think
it's going to happen? I'm extremely
skeptical.
Yeah, I think that makes a lot of sense.
Um
Okay, somebody says something like
a question changing subjects a little
bit. A question for Sid. What about a
fourth scenario? We're already mortal,
perhaps life is truly eternal but in a
different form. Not sure I understand
the question very well. Perhaps you mean
that
life just reinvents itself as time goes
by like the theory of evolution. I don't
know I have no clue.
Okay. Um
There's another one which
Maybe it was a spiritual question. Yes.
Maybe. Yes. Uh possibly. I think so,
too. Yes. Well, but you know, so here's
a comment about this whole transhumanist
um
idea, which is if you really take it to
the extreme, you know, the real extreme
transhumanism is to get rid of the flesh
altogether. Is to become information.
Information that can basically just keep
going from machine to machine or
eventually, you know, even in any
machine altogether. So isn't this just
reinventing
the soul?
Right? In in modern technological terms,
right? Because you just get rid of
flesh. The flesh is a problem. Look at
all this mess we have to do, right? Cut
genes here and all that stuff to get to
and and if you get rid of it, all you
have is information. If that's really
true, then here we are. We just
transport ourselves
immaterially across time.
So there is a huge religious component
at the core of this transhumanist
movement. Lots of scientists don't
obviously think like that.
But I think it's there for a lot of
people that actually believe in it and
want to feel it. Now something more for
you guys.
Well, I
also wrote books, but as authors of
books, you are you are immortal.
Your books, your words now live forever.
How do you feel about it?
I won't answer that. That's for you
guys.
I mean, I wish I had not put the word
with
in page 66 of
making it up. Um Well, I don't know,
Elizabeth, what what what do you what do
you feel?
let's put it another way. Why do you
feel compelled to write books?
Wow.
Um
I'm not sure I do feel compelled to
write books. It's it's it's kind of a
torment to write books and um
you know, when you know, you write a
book, I I would you know, for myself, I
write a book, there's a certain
satisfaction when you're done after the
torment and and you are hoping to put
something out into the world in a
package, you know,
that you hope that people
uh that
that will you know make them think think
differently. I guess that's what what I
hope for and I'm I'm sure also to a
certain extent Sid hopes for and you
know as for immortality
you know to me you know
I I I look around. I live in a college
town. I look around the infinite number
of books that have been sitting there
and not taken out for generations.
So I'm not sure that that's really a
good a good way to achieve immortality
has it.
I think in my case I
I have a very simple formula or a
thought about why why to write anything.
Um
I think
everything
should
raise a question or or or ask a
question.
My two books are
three books but two two two the bigger
books are are very much directed by
individual questions. The first book The
Emperor of All Maladies came about
because a patient asked me a question.
She said um
I was giving her chemotherapy and she
said where are we going with all of this
and you can take that question at face
value or you can ask the question where
are we going? I mean this is a an
illness that is
you know redefined. Cancer has redefined
our relationship to disease so much so
that
we no longer use
society to
as a lens to view cancer. We use cancer
as a lens to view society.
That much influence on our perception of
ourselves, our perception of our future
and perception of our mortality
and yet we had no history, no road map
for that. Um
In the gene I raise a question about who
are we
and what are the limits of and how what
we change.
So so and and I think in general
that's been my approach to this. A book
I think is successful. I mean Liz's book
which I devoured by the way
Six Extinction asks again asks a
question. It's It's a book that raises a
question and tries to offer an answer to
a question. Those to me are fun and even
fiction
does that. I mean my my wife's a
sculptor.
Whenever I come up to a sculpture I say
to her well what I mean she asks me once
in a while I'll go to the studio and
she'll say well tell me about what you
think about this work and I'll say the
first thing I'll always say is what
question is this piece trying to answer?
What question is this painting trying to
answer? Every painting, every thing in
my lens may not be your lens but in my
lens is about what question is this
trying to solve? What is it trying to
raise?
And it's it's it's a one way of viewing
the world. It's a way of viewing the
world in which everything is driven by a
series of questions. Yeah. So in the end
of the day I guess we're meaning seeking
creatures
and we do the things we do because we we
have the urge to to engage with these,
right? And and that's what makes you not
completely whole but at least more
whole.
Right?
Okay. So there's one last question that
I wanted to say and then we'll we'll
close
on soft immortality.
In some sense we're already living it
and I this is the numbers here. I don't
know 50 billion cells from your body die
every year. Is that correct? 50 billion.
It's 52 but
Okay.
Our bodies days ago are different from
today's.
Um
And that's an interesting question,
right? What how Where is the group of
people This is the Delphic boat
question, right? The famous
the famous conundrum which has been
raised many times by philosophers since
a long time. If you have a boat and you
replace every plank in the boat is the
boat still a boat? This actually is a
question that has very much to do with
things that you were thinking about too.
The question you raised about identity.
If you recreate the planet and
repopulate it with everything that we
ever saw
Would it be the same planet?
be the same planet?
And there are this is a very fundamental
philosophical question.
I'm not sure I have a
single kind of answer to that but but
the point is that the
the fundamental difference um
is a difference in autonomy.
So
and
again this goes into some
some things that we've been thinking
about as as biologists for a while. Why
is a body a body?
Um it's a Delphic boat question. If your
cells are being replaced all the time
why is a human body a single body? It's
a Delphic boat.
Where the the question begins to become
interesting is your body remains a body
because it has autonomy. It is servicing
yourself. It is It is in service of
something.
When you necessarily create a clone and
this again there are many parallels to
the planet here.
When you make a clone that clone assumes
autonomy of itself. If there was a war
between you and your clone
the clone would side for itself
and and it would say to go take your
GoPro memories and I'll tell you where
to put them
and this may indeed be the case. If we
want to do this version of immortality
or this version even if we take
transhumanism to the nth extent as
information
movement what is what is what is there
not to say that at the third generation
this machine would say I'm not
interested in your memories.
Go take your memories. I want my new
ones
and we would end up being right back to
ironically where we are now. When our
children say I'll tell you what to do
with
with with your recommendation to read
War and Peace, Daddy.
So so so there is of course these are I
mean obviously these are deeper
questions but they go back not the
metaphors extend across human beings
into into into planets and ecosystems as
well.
Okay. Well, just one last thing that I
wanted to say that you can be sure that
given modern astronomy there's only one
planet Earth in the whole universe.
There may be other planets that could be
somewhat similar but no planet will have
the same history as our planet. So this
is the only Earth that exists and
furthermore there are no other humans in
the whole universe. There may be
humanoids out there. Who knows? We have
no clue but there is only one species
like our own because we are the product
of the history of a very specific
contingent history of our planet. So
we're very special in the end of the day
us and the planet. So let's do something
to protect it. Thank you. Thank you.